---
layout: post
title: "#16202 Refactor network message deserialization (net processing)"
---

[https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16202](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16202)

## Notes

- Today's PR under review is part of on-going work by
  [Jonas Schnelli](https://twitter.com/_jonasschnelli_)
  on BIP 324: *Version 2 Peer-to-Peer Message Transport Protocol.* Here are some
  resources to learn more about it, or as a refresher:
  - [BIP 324 draft proposal](https://gist.github.com/jonasschnelli/c530ea8421b8d0e80c51486325587c52)
    by Jonas Schnelli
  - [BIP 324 keynote presentation at Breaking Bitcoin](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1C5AAHI6NaR-qes3BpZQaOd7C8AIR5mUB/view)
    by Jonas Schnelli (43 slides)
  - [BIP 324 presentation at Chaincode Labs](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1o6PaA-vAWXhpCHHbBkUGZJ-6bmde6gEY/view)
    by Jon Atack (8 slides, a quick summary if you are short on time)

- BIP 324 PRs that have been merged:
  - [PR 15512 Add ChaCha20 encryption option (XOR)](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15512)
    for the stream cipher
  - [PR 15519 Add Poly1305 implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15519)
    for the MAC message auth code
  - [PR 15649 Add ChaCha20Poly1305@Bitcoin AEAD](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15649)

- A short follow-up PR you can review after this one:
  - [PR 16562 Refactor message transport packaging](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16562)
    --- refactors packaging logic, versus deserialization in today's PR

- If you add any tests, assertions or logs while reviewing today's PR, please
  save the diff in a public gist! We can share links to see what we tested.

## Questions

- Did you review the PR? Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK?

- Why was this PR written and considered high-priority?

- Which roles and classes are being separated in the first commit?

- Why is a unique_ptr used rather than a shared_ptr? What are the trade-offs?
  Is this mentioned in the Bitcoin Core [developer
  notes](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md)?

- Describe the Adapter pattern in 1-2 sentences. What is another frequent name
  for it? What are two general kinds of adapters? Which of the two kinds is more
  flexible, and what might be the trade-off? Which kind is used in this PR, and
  who are the participants (target, client, adaptee, adapter)?

- Any other comments, feedback, or questions?

## Meeting log

```
19:00 <jonatack> Hi all! Welcome to this week's episode of the Bitcoin Core PR Review club.
19:00 <fjahr> hi
19:00 <pinheadmz> hi
19:00 <sebastiavstaa> hi
19:00 <jonatack> We usually start Bitcoin Core IRC meetings with a 'hi' so it's clear who's at keyboard. Feel free to say hi here!
19:00 <gorazdko> hi
19:01 <michaelfolkson> Holla
19:01 <jonatack> This week, we're talking about PR16202 - "Refactor network message deserialization" by jonasschnelli.
19:01 <jonatack> The PR is part of on-going work by jonasschnelli on BIP 324: Version 2 Peer-to-Peer Message Transport Protocol.
19:01 <lightlike> hi
19:01 <zenogais> hi all
19:02 <sosthene> hi
19:02 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: By any chance, are you here? Would you like to say anything about this PR or the next steps for BIP 324? Feel free to jump in.
19:03 <jonatack> Let's get started. Did you review the PR? What are your thoughts... Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, NACK?
19:03 <fjahr> tested ACK although I did not have much time to look at the code
19:04 <zenogais> Tested ACK. I was able to review the whole PR as well as test it.
19:04 <lightlike> concept ack, haven't understood the code yet completely.
19:04 <jonatack> fjahr: Excellent.
19:04 <jonatack> etscrivner: jkczyz: Great to see your reviews of the PR on GitHub!
19:04 ⚡ zenogais is etscrivner btw
19:04 <jonatack> zenogais: thanks!
19:05 <jonatack> How did you all test the changes?
19:05 <sebastiavstaa> built and ran the tests.
19:05 <zenogais> I ran the unit and functional tests. Also used my own P2P library in C to run some manual tests and make sure things worked as I expected.
19:05 <jonatack> Did anyone add any tests, assertions, or custom logging to test the PR?
19:06 <pinheadmz> built and tested, broke the test and tested the test :-)
19:06 <pinheadmz> just the one test that was altered, the error message is changed
19:06 <pinheadmz> I assume because its a refactor, the existing tests cover and protect against regression.
19:06 <jonatack> On my end, I added some logging for sanity checks https://gist.github.com/jonatack/d6a228878e6ef5f582ff75c974f2d6c3
19:06 <jonatack> and would like to run the changes through gdb tomorrow for my review, since p2p can be a risky area.
19:06 <sosthene> I do have a question that is more about the whole BIP than this PR. I remember some time ago evoskuil criticizing the BIP on Twitter I think, but I couldn't find the thread again. So what could be controversial about it?
19:06 <sosthene> (if anyone knows what I'm talking about and can link to evoskuil arguments I would be very grateful)
19:07 <jonatack> sosthene: I wasn't aware of controversy regarding BIP 324.
19:08 <zenogais> Might be useful to have some sort of P2P fuzzing also (if it doesn't already exist).
19:08 <pinheadmz> jonatack: that's cool - these properties i.e. `msg.m_command` are new to this PR right?
19:08 <sosthene> jonatack: I guess that's evoskuil vs the rest of the world then
19:09 <jonatack> pinheadmz: yeah, I want to see the values as a sanity check
19:09 <jonatack> sosthene: if you have a link please share!
19:09 <michaelfolkson> Nor me, sorry sosthene. Perhaps contact him?
19:10 <jonatack> zenogais: Fuzzing is one area I think the maintainers would be very happy to see additional tests or data for.
19:10 <jonatack> MarcoFalke is the primary contact for that. See also doc/fuzzing.md.
19:10 <michaelfolkson> I didn't stumble on any conceptual downsides to this BIP
19:11 <zenogais> jonatack: Thanks, will give it a look. Have been thinking about P2P fuzzing specifically for a couple of weeks now.
19:12 <jonasschnelli> hi
19:12 <jkczyz> hi
19:12 ⚡ zenogais waves
19:12 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: Hi, thanks for coming by!
19:13 <jonasschnelli> Sorry for being late
19:13 <jonatack> jkczyz: Hi, and thank you for reviewing the PR.
19:13 ⚡ jonasschnelli is reading back
19:13 ⚡ next-defection thumbs up to fuzzing
19:13 <jonasschnelli> Should I explain why I did this PR (PR16202)?
19:13 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: Would you like to say anything about this PR, or the next steps for BIP 324?
19:13 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: Yes, please!
19:13 <lightlike> here is a link to the points by evoskuil: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2019-March/016810.html
19:14 <sosthene> I found it https://twitter.com/evoskuil/status/825089930221064192
19:14 <jonasschnelli> PR16202 is just about adding flexibility for allowing multiple transport protocol
19:14 <jonatack> jkczyz: (we were discussing how people tested the PR, if you would like to share what you did to test it)
19:15 <sosthene> and this wrt BIP151 https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0151
19:15 <jonasschnelli> It is necessary for any forms of protocol upgrades and also a nice refactor if nothing gets added (which we don't hope).
19:15 <jonasschnelli> evoskuil's points are valid,... not sure if the overall desire (or dislike) of encryption is something we should discuss here.
19:15 <jonasschnelli> But we can...
19:15 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: What are the next BIP324 PRs we should review after this one is hopefully in?
19:16 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: and after PR #16562: Refactor message transport packaging https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16562
19:16 <jonasschnelli> Yes... that one is in alignment with the deserialization.
19:16 <jonasschnelli> I have a branch I'd like to open after those two PRs have been merged.
19:17 <jonasschnelli> Both PRs are pretty much straightforward with little to no impact.
19:18 <michaelfolkson> What was the thinking behind separating the serialization and deserialization into two PRs? Safety or just cleaner?
19:18 <pinheadmz> jonasschnelli: how often would a node generate a new key for DH? every new peer connection? every restart? just once?
19:18 <jonasschnelli> michaelfolkson: I always try to make PRs as small as possible if they allow to be splitted.
19:18 <jkczyz> jonatack: Wasn't able to test, only reviewied this morning. Busy last week on the job. :)
19:19 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: Not to speak for jonasschnelli but it's usually easier for smaller changes to get review and merged quickly.
19:19 <jonasschnelli> pinheadmz: it's described in the BIP. The DH key is generated once during the encryption handshake.
19:19 <jonasschnelli> But we do rekey every <1GB
19:19 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: it's generally good to keep PRs focused.
19:20 <michaelfolkson> Makes sense. The deserialization PR isn't much use without the serialization PR though, is it?
19:20 <jonasschnelli> large PRs in risky areas (like the p2p field) tend to loop forever in rebase limbo. :)
19:20 <jonatack> jkczyz: I understand :)
19:20 <jonasschnelli> michaelfolkson: They are independent.
19:20 <jonasschnelli> But for BIP324, we need both in the end
19:20 <jonasschnelli> But they are both refactors that are valid on their own
19:20 <michaelfolkson> Ok thanks
19:21 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: Is this PR still a prerequisite for https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/14032
19:22 <jonatack> "Add p2p layer encryption with ECDH/ChaCha20Poly1305 #14032" ... on the road to implementing BIP324?
19:22 <zenogais> One comment: Separating serialization from message data structure is I'm thinking cleaner overall, even if this wasn't in order to add V2 serialization I still think it's a good refactor.
19:22 <jonasschnelli> jonatack: yes. Somehow. But they need refactor once 16202 lands.
19:22 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: right.
19:23 <jonatack> As the review club improves over time, it would be great to see us tackle the high priority PRs more often.
19:23 <jonasschnelli> in general, the criticism about no need for encryption (voskuli) since it's all public anyways looks valid at first sight,... but
19:24 <jonasschnelli> BIP324 eliminates passive observing and adds detectability of a MITM
19:24 <jonasschnelli> its opportunistic encryption and therefore a building block
19:25 <zenogais> jonasschnelli: It sounds like MITM detection is optional and must be done manually by peers though via side-channel?
19:25 <sosthene> It seems Eric is arguing that MITM detection would hard in practice, since nodes would need to exchange session ID over safe channels.
19:26 <jonasschnelli> zenogais: yes. BIP324 has no MITM detectability next to manual comparison of session IDs...
19:26 <jonasschnelli> but....
19:26 <jonasschnelli> An attacker needs to take the risk of being detected... which is a big difference to the current status quo.
19:26 <zenogais> Protection against passive observability is still probably a pretty big win for most users.
19:26 <jonasschnelli> he cannot know if an authentication happens after he has mitm-led the encryption
19:27 <jonasschnelli> usually detectable observing and tampering is much less valuable for an attacker
19:27 <next-defection> I disagree with the critiques brought up by evoskuli, P2P encryption increase observation costs (undeniable)
19:27 <zenogais> Yeah, and optional MITM detection is still better than V1.
19:28 <jonasschnelli> right now,... everyone on the network between two peers can delay a block... peers cannot detect that and the attacker can be sure of that.
19:28 <next-defection> even if "but MITM is still possible" "better is the enemy of good" situations are present
19:29 <jonasschnelli> Yes. And there are schemes (Pieter Wuille's for example) building on top of BIP324, that would broad scale detect MITMs.
19:29 <next-defection> the blockchain stores a limited set of information, it doesn't store the transport information which is highly valuable to well-funded attackers
19:30 <jonasschnelli> Yes. The p2p traffic is in general not considered public.
19:30 <jonasschnelli> But chain analysis will still be possible with BIP324.
19:31 <jonasschnelli> (since this is very likely active listening)
19:31 <sosthene> Does it still make sense to use Tor with this "native" encryption?
19:31 <sosthene> I mean, does it bring any extra security or is it negligible?
19:31 <jonasschnelli> Tor is an alternative,.. though a slightly different threat model (mostly censorship)
19:31 <jonasschnelli> But... the great thing is, we can run BIP324 through tor
19:31 <jonasschnelli> at no cost
19:31 <jonasschnelli> (faster, less bandwidth)
19:32 <jonatack> sosthene: IIRC, BIP 324 makes targeting more difficult for SPV nodes and those not using a VPN or Tor, but Tor is still valid with it.
19:32 <jonasschnelli> BIP324 is our own encryption with no dependencies. Simple and effective.
19:33 <jonasschnelli> Additionally, you can circumvent censorship or connectivity issues with tor.
19:34 <jonasschnelli> Right now,... there are a bunch of people connecting their mobile wallets (Green, BRD, Schildbach) to their nodes with a IPv4
19:34 <jonasschnelli> Which is _absolutely_ not secure.
19:34 <sosthene> jonatack: (I just finished running all the tests, finally! all passed :)
19:34 <jonasschnelli> (and those users assume to preserve privacy)
19:35 <jonasschnelli> however, to solve that non-tor connection, we need BIP150
19:35 <jonasschnelli> (which may follow after BIP324)
19:36 <jonatack> BIP150: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0150.mediawiki
19:36 <jonatack> "This BIP describes a way for peers to authenticate to other peers to guarantee node ownership and/or allow peers to access additional or limited node services, without the possibility of fingerprinting."
19:37 <jonasschnelli> But one thing after another. :) PR16202 is a baby step forwards.
19:38 <michaelfolkson> Re the new message structure. Variable size message is big win. You also got rid of the magic bytes?
19:38 <jonasschnelli> Yes.
19:39 <michaelfolkson> Why? Not needed?
19:40 <michaelfolkson> I suppose not.
19:40 <jonasschnelli> I don't think it's needed. We have port for specific network. And it would fail anyways quickly.
19:40 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: When working on changes to the p2p network, are there any particular ways you test that the changes are working as intended?
19:41 <jonatack> We don't really have a framework yet for p2p simulation.
19:41 <jonasschnelli> jonatack: I think the test framework covers a lot. Though, running such PRs for a while (couple of days) on a node may reveal more details.
19:41 <zenogais> So net magic isn't needed to avoid peering with wrong network peers?
19:41 <jonasschnelli> zenogais: yes... I think that was the intention.
19:42 <jonasschnelli> But the cost of 4 bytes per every message (and ~50% are less then 64 bytes) is quite high.
19:42 <zenogais> Right, I suppose it could just be part of the handshake.
19:43 <jonasschnelli> Yes. Maybe this is not a bad idea.
19:44 <jonatack> Shorter INVs are a win since they make up so many of the messages.
19:44 <jonasschnelli> Yes.
19:44 <zenogais> Without seeing the network magic bytes at least once, I could see scenarios where nodes incorrectly peer - especially if they're sync from scratch.
19:44 <jonasschnelli> The network magic could maybe be added to the HKDF
19:44 <jonasschnelli> https://gist.github.com/jonasschnelli/c530ea8421b8d0e80c51486325587c52#symmetric-encryption-cipher-keys
19:44 <jonasschnelli> instead of `PRK = HKDF_EXTRACT(hash=SHA256, salt="BitcoinSharedSecret||INITIATOR_32BYTES_PUBKEY||RESPONDER_32BYTES_PUBKEY", ikm=ECDH_KEY)`
19:44 <jonasschnelli> make `PRK = HKDF_EXTRACT(hash=SHA256, salt="NETWORK_MAGIC||BitcoinSharedSecret||INITIATOR_32BYTES_PUBKEY||RESPONDER_32BYTES_PUBKEY", ikm=ECDH_KEY)`
19:45 <jonasschnelli> A handshake on the wrong network would just fail.
19:45 <zenogais> Ah nice, yeah that would work perfectly.
19:45 <jonasschnelli> Good point zenogais. I'll add others for feedback on that idea.
19:45 <jkczyz> jonatack: High priority because it allows two separate transport implementations would be my educated guess.
19:46 <jonasschnelli> High priority is a per-developer thing. I consider it high-prio/blocker for my work.
19:46 <jonasschnelli> Since we have no central planning, every active developer can add stuff to the high-prio list
19:46 <jonasschnelli> (to avoid central planning)
19:46 <michaelfolkson> It is a blocker to other PRs yeah
19:47 <michaelfolkson> And for a direction that seems to have broad consensus, bar Eric.
19:48 <jonasschnelli> I think most people agree that it is a useful thing.
19:48 <jonasschnelli> We have also already merged the cryptographic primitives (chacha20, poly1305, hkdf) as well as the AEAD
19:48 <jonasschnelli> (which are less risky since they are only used in tests).
19:50 <jonatack> Improving privacy is so essential. A thousand thank you's, Jonas, for your work on this.
19:50 <jonasschnelli> Thanks for reviewing guys!
19:50 <zenogais> Yeah, this is great work, really looking forward to the V2 transport stuff.
19:50 <jonatack> The best way each of us can help jonasschnelli move BIP 324 forward, is to review these PRs.
19:50 <jonatack> Let's all get our review in tomorrow for those who haven't yet.
19:51 <sosthene> jonasschnelli: Thanks, it was great to have you here.
19:51 <jonatack> Ten minutes left. I'm glad we've been able to discuss these important issues. Any other comments, feedback, or questions?
19:51 <michaelfolkson> In terms of future work, jonatack you referred to 64 byte public keys and randomizing ports. Can you elaborate?
19:52 <michaelfolkson> Also found it interesting that there could be different authentication schemes.
19:52 <lightlike> do you think that v2 will take over completely, or do you think both v1 and v2 will coexist for a long time?
19:52 <jonasschnelli> I think so.
19:52 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: You mean in my slides? They were only a quick summary of jonasschnelli's complete slides.
19:52 <jonatack> michaelfolkson:, lightlike: Great questions.
19:53 <michaelfolkson> Ah ok. I'll look back at Jonas' slides.
19:53 <jonasschnelli> I think randomising ports would go into the direction of censorship resistance which is very complicated and I think this should be done on other layers like tor
19:54 <jonasschnelli> even with randomised ports, by looking at the package size and burst-characteristics, identifying bitcoin traffic is trivial.
19:55 <jonasschnelli> lightlike: back to the v1/v2 question. I think, when there are enough peers supporting v2, people may disable v1
19:55 <jonasschnelli> but sadly its a slow transition
19:56 <jonasschnelli> (unless v1 gets exploited which is unlikely).
19:57 <jonatack> jonasschnelli: Would you see v2 on by default in future releases? Or after a certain level of v2 adoption?
19:57 <jonasschnelli> I hope... I guess this is the plan. Though time will show and it needs enough people willing to run v2.
19:58 <jonatack> Privacy may turn out to be a good motivation.
19:58 <michaelfolkson> Less systemic risk if half the network is running v1 and half is running v2 rather than everyone running v2 :)
19:58 <jonatack> If anyone wants to continue with other questions after we wrap up, I'll hang around.
19:59 <jkczyz> jonasschnelli: I have a suggestion regarding TransportDeserializer's interface but will leave a new comment on the PR.
19:59 <jonasschnelli> thanks jkczyz
19:59 <jonasschnelli> I'll try to tackle the comments by tomorrow
20:00 <jonatack> Thanks, everyone, for participating this week!
20:00 <jonatack> Thanks jonasschnelli for coming by!
20:00 <michaelfolkson> Thanks both
20:00 <lightlike> thanks jonatack, jonasschnelli!
20:00 <jonasschnelli> thanks all
20:00 <zenogais> Thanks all, appreciate you fielding our questions jonasschnelli
20:00 <sebastiavstaa> thanks all
```
